<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023,2024 Oracle and/or its affiliates.
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
-->

# Configuring Network Time

This chapter describes how to configure a system to use `chrony` as an implementation of the Network Time Protocol \(NTP\) feature, as a replacement for `ntp`. The chapter also describes the Precision Time Protocol \(PTP\) daemons that are used to set the system time.

## About the chrony Suite

`chrony` is a feature that implements NTP to maintain timekeeping accurately on the network. In Enterprise Linux 8, the `chrony` daemon service replaces `ntpd` for the management of NTP.

`chrony` has two components, which are provided in the `chrony` package:

- `chronyd` service daemon

- `chornyc` service utility

### About the chronyd Service Daemon

The `chronyd` service daemon updates the system clock of mobile systems and virtual machines after a period of suspension or disconnection from a network. The service can also be used to implement a basic NTP client or NTP server. As an NTP server, `chronyd` can synchronize with upper level stratum NTP servers or act as a stratum 1 server using time signals that are received from the Global Positioning System \(GPS\) or radio broadcasts such as DCF77, MSF, or WWVB.

In an Enterprise Linux system, this service daemon is enabled by default

**Note:**

`chronyd` uses NTP version 3 \([RFC 1305](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1305)\), with features that are compatible with NTP version 4 \([RFC 5905](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5905)\). However, `chronyd` does not support several important features of NTP version 4, nor does it support the use of PTP.

For more information, see the `chrony(1)` manual page and files in the `/usr/share/doc/chrony/` directory.

### Using the chronyc Service Utility

The `chronyc` utility is a tool for managing the `chronyd` service, display information about the service's operation, or change the service's configuration.

The command operates in two modes:

- Non interactive mode: In this mode, you use the following syntax:

  ```
  sudo chronyc *subcommand*
  ```

- Interactive mode: Typing the command by itself activates the interactive mode and displays the `chronyc>` prompt. From this prompt you can issue `chronyc` subcommands.

  ```
  sudo chronyc
  ```

  ```nocopybutton
  chronyc>
  ```

  From the prompt, you can issue the different `chronyc` subcommands as needed. The following examples show the information that's generated by the `sources` and `sourcestats` subcommands:

  ```
  chronyc> sources
  ```

  ```nocopybutton
  210 Number of sources = 4
  MS Name/IP address         Stratum Poll Reach LastRx Last sample
  ===============================================================================
  ^+ service1-eth3.debrecen.hp     2   6    37    21  -2117us[-2302us] +/-   50ms
  ^* ns2.telecom.lt                2   6    37    21   -811us[ -997us] +/-   40ms
  ^+ strato-ssd.vpn0.de            2   6    37    21   +408us[ +223us] +/-   78ms
  ^+ kvm1.websters-computers.c     2   6    37    22  +2139us[+1956us] +/-   54ms
  ```

  ```
  chronyc> sourcestats
  ```

  ```nocopybutton
  210 Number of sources = 4
  Name/IP Address            NP  NR  Span  Frequency  Freq Skew  Offset  Std Dev
  ==============================================================================
  service1-eth3.debrecen.hp   5   4   259     -0.394     41.803  -2706us   502us
  ns2.telecom.lt              5   4   260     -3.948     61.422   +822us   813us
  strato-ssd.vpn0.de          5   3   259      1.609     68.932   -581us   801us
  kvm1.websters-computers.c   5   5   258     -0.263      9.586  +2008us   118us
  chronyc> `tracking`
  Reference ID    : 212.59.0.2 (ns2.telecom.lt)
  Stratum         : 3
  Ref time (UTC)  : Tue Sep 30 12:33:16 2014
  System time     : 0.000354079 seconds slow of NTP time
  Last offset     : -0.000186183 seconds
  RMS offset      : 0.000186183 seconds
  Frequency       : 28.734 ppm slow
  Residual freq   : -0.489 ppm
  Skew            : 11.013 ppm
  Root delay      : 0.065965 seconds
  Root dispersion : 0.007010 seconds
  Update interval : 64.4 seconds
  Leap status     : Normal
  ```

  To quit using the interactive mode, type `exit`.

**Note:**

Any changes you implement with the `chronyc` command are effective only until the next restart of the `chronyd` daemon. To make the changes permanent, you must enter these in the `/etc/chrony.conf` file. See [Editing the chronyd Configuration File](network-ConfiguringNetworkTime.md#).

For more information, see the `chronyc(1)` manual page and files in the `/usr/share/doc/chrony/` directory.

### Configuring the chronyd Service

To configure the `chronyd` service on a system:

1. Install the `chrony` package.

   ```
   sudo dnf install chrony
   ```

2. If remote access to the local NTP service is required, configure the system firewall to allow access to the NTP service in the appropriate zones, for example:

   ```
   sudo firewall-cmd --zone=*zone* --add-service=ntp
   ```

   ```
   sudo firewall-cmd --zone=*zone* --permanent --add-service=ntp
   ```

3. Start the `chronyd` service and configure it to start following a system reboot.

   Note that by default, `chrony` is enabled after installation.

   ```
   sudo systemctl start chronyd
   ```

   ```
   sudo systemctl enable chronyd
   ```

### Editing the chronyd Configuration File

In the `/etc/chrony.conf` file, the default configuration assumes that the system has network access to public NTP servers with which it can synchronise.

The following example configures a system to access three NTP servers:

```
pool *NTP\_server\_1*
pool *NTP\_server\_2*
pool *NTP\_server\_3*
driftfile /var/lib/chrony/drift
keyfile /etc/chrony.keys
...
```

To configure `chronyd` to act as an NTP server for a specified client or subnet, use the `allow` directive, as shown in bold in the following example:

```
pool *NTP\_server\_1*
pool *NTP\_server\_2*
pool *NTP\_server\_3*
**allow 192.168.2/24**
driftfile /var/lib/chrony/drift
keyfile /etc/chrony.keys
...
```

To create keys for an authentication mechanism based on public key cryptography, use the `chronyc keygen` command.

**Note:**

`Autokey` in `ntp` no longer works in `chrony`.

If a system has only intermittent access to NTP servers, the following configuration might be appropriate:

```
pool *NTP\_server\_1* offline
pool *NTP\_server\_2* offline
pool *NTP\_server\_3* offline
driftfile /var/lib/chrony/drift
keyfile /etc/chrony.keys
...
```

If you specify the `offline` keyword, `chronyd` doesn't poll the NTP servers until it receives communication that network access is available. You can use the `chronyc online` and `chronyc offline` commands to inform `chronyd` of the state of network access.

For a more information about the configuration file and its directives, see the `chrony.conf(5)` manual page.

### Converting From ntp to chrony

The following table shows file, command, and terminology equivalents between `ntp` and `chrony`.

| ntp                            | chrony                                 |
| ------------------------------ | -------------------------------------- |
| `/etc/ntp.conf`                | `/etc/chrony.conf`                     |
| `/etc/ntp/keys`                | `/etc/chrony.keys`                     |
| `ntpd`                         | `chronyd`                              |
| `ntpq` command                 | `chronyc` command                      |
| `ntpd.service`                 | `chronyd.service`                      |
| `ntp-wait.service`             | `chrony-wait.service`                  |
| `ntpdate` and `sntp` utilities | `chronyd -q` and `chronyd -t` commands |

The `ntpstat` utility which is available in the `ntpstat` package, now supports `chronyd`. Thus, you can still use the utility in Enterprise Linux 8. The command generates output that's similar to when it's used with `ntp`.

The `/usr/share/doc/chrony/ntp2chrony.py` script is available to help convert existing `ntp` configuration to `chrony`, for example:

```
sudo python3 /usr/share/doc/chrony/ntp2chrony.py -b -v
```

The script supports the conversion of the most common directives in `/etc/ntp.conf` to `chrony`. In the example, the `-b`option specifies to create backup configuration files before converting, while the `-v` option specifies to display verbose messages during the migration process.

To list the different options that you can use with the script, type the following command:

```
sudo python3 /usr/share/doc/chrony/ntp2chrony.py --help
```

## About PTP

Use PTP to synchronise system clocks on a LAN more accurately than than NTP. If network drivers support either hardware or software time stamping, a PTP clock can use the time stamps in PTP messages to resolve propagation delays across a network. With software time stamping, PTP synchronises systems to within a few tens of microseconds. With hardware time stamping, PTP can synchronise systems to within a few tenths of a microsecond. If you require high-precision time synchronization of systems, use hardware time stamping.

A typical PTP configuration on an enterprise local area network consists of:

- One or more _grandmaster clock_ systems.

  A grandmaster clock is typically implemented as specialized hardware that can use high-accuracy GPS signals or lower-accuracy code division several access \(CDMA\) signals, radio clock signals, or NTP as a time reference source. If several grandmaster clocks are available, the best master clock \(BMC\) algorithm selects the grandmaster clock based on the settings of their `priority1`, `clockClass`, `clockAccuracy`, `offsetScaledLogVariance`, and `priority2` parameters and their unique identifier, in that order.

- Several _boundary clock_ systems.

  Each boundary clock is backed up to a grandmaster clock on one subnetwork and relays PTP messages to one or more added subnetworks. A boundary clock is usually implemented as a function of a network switch.

- Several _secondary clock_ systems.

  Each secondary clock on a subnetwork is backed up to a boundary clock, which acts as the _master clock_ for that secondary clock.

For a basic configuration, set up a single grandmaster clock and several secondary clocks on the same network segment and thus eliminates any need for an intermediate layer of boundary clocks.

Grandmaster and secondary clock systems that use only one network interface for PTP are termed _ordinary clocks_.

Boundary clocks require at least two network interfaces for PTP: one interface acts a secondary to a grandmaster clock or a higher-level boundary clock; the other interfaces act as masters to secondary clocks or lower-level boundary clocks.

Synchronization of boundary and secondary clock systems is achieved by sending time stamps in PTP messages. By default, PTP messages are sent in UDPv4 datagrams. You can also configure PTP to use UDPv6 datagrams or Ethernet frames as its transport mechanism.

To use PTP on a system, the driver for at least one of the system's network interfaces must support either software or hardware time stamping. To find out whether the driver for a network interface supports time stamping, use the `ethtool` command:

```
sudo ethtool -T en1
```

```nocopybutton
Time stamping parameters for en1:
Capabilities:
	hardware-transmit     (SOF_TIMESTAMPING_TX_HARDWARE)
	software-transmit     (SOF_TIMESTAMPING_TX_SOFTWARE)
	hardware-receive      (SOF_TIMESTAMPING_RX_HARDWARE)
	software-receive      (SOF_TIMESTAMPING_RX_SOFTWARE)
	software-system-clock (SOF_TIMESTAMPING_SOFTWARE)
	hardware-raw-clock    (SOF_TIMESTAMPING_RAW_HARDWARE)
...
```

The output in the example shows that the `en1` interface supports both hardware and software time stamping capabilities.

With software time stamping, `ptp4l` synchronises the system clock to an external grandmaster clock.

If hardware time stamping is available, `ptp4l` can synchronise the PTP hardware clock to an external grandmaster clock. In this case, you use the `phc2sys` daemon to synchronise the system clock with the PTP hardware clock.

### Configuring the PTP Service

To configure the PTP service on a system:

1. Install the `linuxptp` package.

   ```
   sudo dnf install linuxptp
   ```

2. Edit `/etc/sysconfig/ptp4l` and define the start-up options for the `ptp4l` daemon.

   Grandmaster clocks and secondary clocks require that you define only one interface.

   For example, to use hardware time stamping with interface `en1` on a secondary clock:

   ```
   OPTIONS="-f /etc/ptp4l.conf -i en1 -s"
   ```

   To use software time stamping instead of hardware time stamping, specify the `-S` option:

   ```
   OPTIONS="-f /etc/ptp4l.conf -i en1 -S -s"
   ```

   **Note:**

   The `-s` option specifies that the clock operates only as a secondary \(`slaveOnly` mode\). Don't specify this option for a grandmaster clock or a boundary clock.

   For a grandmaster clock, omit the `-s` option, for example:

   ```
   OPTIONS="-f /etc/ptp4l.conf -i en1"
   ```

   A boundary clock requires that you define at least two interfaces, for example:

   ```
   OPTIONS="-f /etc/ptp4l.conf -i en1 -i en2"
   ```

   You might need to edit the `/etc/ptp4l.conf` file to customize `ptp4l` further, for example:

   - For a grandmaster clock, set the value of the `priority1` parameter to a value between 0 and 127, where lesser values have greater priority when the BMC algorithm selects the grandmaster clock. For a configuration that has a single grandmaster clock, a value of 127 is suggested.

   - If you set the value of `summary_interval` to an integer value _N_ instead of 0, `ptp4l` writes summary clock statistics to `/var/log/messages` every 2_N_ seconds instead of every second \(20 = 1\). For example, a value of 10 would correspond to an interval of 210 or 1024 seconds.

   - The `logging_level` parameter controls the amount of logging information that `ptp4l` records. The default value of `logging_level` is `6`, which corresponds to `LOG_INFO`. To turn off logging, set the value of `logging_level` to `0`. Alternatively, specify the `-q` option to `ptp4l`.

   See the `ptp4l(8)` manual page.

3. Configure the system firewall to accept access by PTP event and general messages to UDP ports 319 and 320 in the appropriate zone, for example:

   ```
   sudo firewall-cmd --zone=*zone* --add-port=319/udp --add-port=320/udp
   ```

   ```
   sudo firewall-cmd --permanent --zone=*zone* --add-port=319/udp --add-port=320/udp
   ```

4. Start the `ptp4l` service and configure it to start following a system reboot.

   ```
   sudo systemctl start ptp4l
   ```

   ```
   sudo systemctl enable ptp4l
   ```

5. To configure `phc2sys` on a clock system that uses hardware time stamping:

   1. Edit the `/etc/sysconfig/phc2sys` file and define the start-up options for the `phc2sys` daemon.

      On a boundary clock or secondary clock, synchronise the system clock with the PTP hardware clock that's associated with the secondary network interface, for example:

      ```
      OPTIONS="-c CLOCK_REALTIME -s en1 -w"
      ```

      **Note:**

      The secondary network interface on a boundary clock is the one that it uses to communicate with the grandmaster clock.

      The `-w` option specifies that `phc2sys` waits until `ptp4l` has synchronised the PTP hardware clock before synchronising the system clock.

      On a grandmaster clock, which derives its system time from a reference time source such as GPS, CDMA, NTP, or a radio time signal, synchronise the network interface's PTP hardware clock from the system clock, for example:

      ```
      OPTIONS="-c en1 -s CLOCK_REALTIME -w"
      ```

      See the `phc2sys(8)` manual page.

   2. Start the `phc2sys` service and configure it to start following a system reboot.

      ```
      sudo systemctl start phc2sys
      ```

      ```
      sudo systemctl enable phc2sys
      ```

You can use the `pmc` command to query the status of `ptp4l` operation. The following example shows the results of running `pmc` on a slave clock system that's directly connected to the grandmaster clock system without any intermediate boundary clocks:

```
sudo pmc -u -b 0 'GET TIME_STATUS_NP'
```

```nocopybutton
sending: GET TIME_STATUS_NP
	080027.fffe.7f327b-0 seq 0 RESPONSE MANAGEMENT TIME_STATUS_NP 
		master_offset              -98434
		ingress_time               1412169090025854874
		cumulativeScaledRateOffset +1.000000000
		scaledLastGmPhaseChange    0
		gmTimeBaseIndicator        0
		lastGmPhaseChange          0x0000'0000000000000000.0000
		gmPresent                  true
		gmIdentity                 080027.fffe.d9e453
```

```
sudo pmc -u -b 0 'GET CURRENT_DATA_SET'
```

```nocopybutton
sending: GET CURRENT_DATA_SET
	080027.fffe.7f327b-0 seq 0 RESPONSE MANAGEMENT CURRENT_DATA_SET 
		stepsRemoved     1
		offsetFromMaster  42787.0
		meanPathDelay    289207.0
```

This output examples include the following useful information:

- **`gmIdentity`**

  The unique identifier of the grandmaster clock, which is based on the MAC address of its network interface.

- **`gmPresent`**

  Whether an external grandmaster clock is available. This value is displayed as `false` on the grandmaster clock itself.

- **`meanPathDelay`**

  An estimate of how many nanoseconds by which synchronization messages are delayed.

- **`offsetFromMaster`**

  The most recent measurement of the time difference in nanoseconds relative to the grandmaster clock.

- **`stepsRemoved`**

  The number of network steps between this system and the grandmaster clock.

For more information, see the `phc2sys(8)`, `pmc(8)`, and `ptp4l(8)` manual pages, and [IEEE 1588](https://www.nist.gov/el/intelligent-systems-division-73500/ieee-1588).

### Using PTP as a Time Source for NTP

To make the PTP-adjusted system time on an NTP server available to NTP clients, include the following entries in the `/etc/chrony.conf` file on the NTP server:

```
server    127.127.1.0
fudge     127.127.1.0 stratum 0
```

These entries define the local system clock as the time reference.

**Note:**

Don't configure any added `server` lines in the file.
